In this video, we'll learn
about recursive functions and
how to implement them in c++.
A recursive function is a
function that calls itself.
The function can call itself
directly or indirectly
through another function.
If we end up with two or more
activation records on the
stack for the same function,
then we have recursion.
Recursion is great for
certain classes of problems.
Recursive problem solving is something
that most programmers have a little
trouble doing when they first learn.
That's normal.
Eventually, you'll understand
that Recursive Solutions
make sense in certain cases.
There are many types of recursive
problems that lend themselves
well to a recursive solution.
In mathematics, we had
factorial, Fibonacci numbers
fractals and many more.
In searching and sorting, we
have binary search and search
trees, depth-first search,
graphs and also many more.
There are also classic problems
like the towers of Hanoi that
can really be hard to solve
with a non-recursive solution.
Let's see how we can calculate the
factorial of a number using recursion.
Here we see the definition
for factorial as you
would find in a math book.
Factorial is defined
in terms of itself.
That's what recursion is all about.
We have a base case.
So in this case, factorial
of 0 is 1 by definition.
And we have the recursive case.
Factorial of n or n factorial
is equal to n x n - 1 factorial,
see the recursion there.
Let's see how we can
implement this in c++.
So let's look at the
code starting at main.
We call factorial and pass in
1/8 of the factorial function.
When the factorial function
returns, the value returned
will be output to the console.
In this case, we expect 40320.
Okay, so now let's look at the
factorial 'function itself.
First, we need to decide what
types will accept the return.
The factorial function can
generate massively huge numbers.
So in this case, I'm using
unsigned long long as the return
type and the parameter type.
This can hold very, very
large positive integers, but
we can still get an overflow
even with such a big number.
If you look at the code for the
factorial function, it looks
exactly like the mathematical
definition of factorial.
We check a base case.
In this case, if n is
equal to 0, we return 1.
Remember, the return knocks you
out of the function immediately.
Otherwise, we return the
results of calling the factorial
function again with n - 1.
So in this case, it would be returned
n x call factorial with n - 1.
There's the recursion.
The base case is super important
since it's what stops the recursion.
Otherwise, we would request
indefinitely and eventually we
would run out of stack space
and get a stack overflow error.
In a bit, we'll head over to the
IDE and I'll walk you step-by-step
in detail through an example call
to factorial so you can see exactly
what's happening on the stack.
Let's look at calculating
a Fibonacci number now.
Here's the definition
for Fibonacci number.
There to base cases.
Fibonacci of 00, and
Fibonacci of 1 is 1.
And the recursive case is Fibonacci
of n is equal to Fibonacci of
N - 1 + the Fibonacci of n - 2.
Again, notice the
recursive definition.
Fibonacci is defined
in terms of itself.
I think you can see how
to implement this in c++.
Again, I've decided to use
unsigned long long since Fibonacci
can also produce huge numbers.
Notice in the main, I call Fibonacci.
And the result I
expect back is 832040.
Now let's look at the
Fibonacci function.
Notice the handling of the bass cases.
If n is less than or equal to
1, then we simply return n.
So when n is 0., we return 0.
And when n is 1, we return 1.
That handles both base
cases in one step.
We could easily rewrite this
condition to explicitly check
n equals 0 and n equals 1, but
this achieve the same result.
This base cases with
stops the recursion.
If n is not 0 or 1, then we
call Fibonacci again with both
pieces of the problem definition.
Eventually, recursion will stop and
the result will be returned to main.
Notice how much the code
looks like the mathematical
definition of Fibonacci.
This is by design.
Let me give you a few
thoughts on recursion.
Remember, recursion is
a form of iteration.
So anything that can be done
recursively can also be done with
the iteration and vice versa.
Use recursion only
when it makes sense.
The problem must lend itself
to a recursive solution.
Don't use recursion
to count from 1 to 10.
Remember the base cases.
They are with stops the recursion
and are super important.
Because of the call stack,
recursion can be quite
resource-intensive especially if
you have a very deep recursion.
It's not uncommon when you're first
learning recursion to recusing
definitely and run out of stacks space
resulting in a stack overflow error.
That's perfectly fine.
This is how you learn.
I can't tell you how many times
in my career I've seen recursive
functions rewritten to iterative
solutions because of resource issues.
Generally, an iterative solution
to a recursive define problem
is less elegant and more
difficult to understand in code.
But sometimes we have to meet
non-functional requirements
and that's what it takes.
Let's head over to the IDE and walk
through a factorial example in detail.
So I'm in the IDE.
I'm in the section 11 workspace.
And there are two projects
that are interesting here,
both use recursive functions.
When is the Fibonacci project to
me, that's a factorial project.
We'll walk through a detailed
example of how factorial
works recursively in a minute.
But here's Fibonacci, and it's
just like I wrote in the slides.
So here in the man, I'm calculating
the Fibonacci number for 5 30 and 40.
You can see the 40 is pretty large.
If you try to do like a Fibonacci
a 50 or something like that, it's
going to take a while because
there's a lot of recursion going on.
It all depends on how
fast your machine is.
Even here when I do a
Fibonacci 40, I'll run this.
And you will see a
little bit of a delay.
You see that it took just over
a second delay their to actually
calculate that Fibonacci number.
It's a pretty large number.
But once you start getting to
really large numbers here,
for example, 45 50, then the recursion
just tremendous, and it takes a
while to solve those problems.
Okay, so let me go back to Factorial.
That's the one I really
want to go over here.
So here's the factorial.
Just like we wrote it, the
factorial of some number and
those four examples here.
You can see factorial 63.
Factorial 8 is 4320 and so forth.
You can see the factors of
20 is a really big number.
And as this number grows here,
that never really grows big time.
So let me run.
This and you could see
it's really fast here.
But once you start really
increasing that number there,
it's going to slow down big time.
Now what I want to do is I want
to -- I'm going to comment these
out just for a minute because I'm
only interested in factorial of 3.
I want to walk through a stack
example of exactly what's going on
when we call factorial with a 3.
We could do a 4 or 5 or 6.
If we did that, we'd be here
all day drawing stuff on the
stack because of the recursion.
3 is an easy number.
It'll be pretty easy to do on a
stack, and it won't take so long.
But you'll understand exactly
what's happening and whether you
use 3 or 4 5, you'll understand.
Okay, so let's do that now.
Okay, so here's my stack.
And my main is on the stack, and all
main is doing is it's out putting
the result of factorial with a 3.
So I'm just going to use
fact rather than right out
the entire work factorial.
So main is calling factorial with a 3.
And the resulting gets back,
it's going to output, right.
Okay, so that's simple enough.
So what happens?
Well, main calls that
function factorial, right.
So we're going to activate
that function, and we'll
put it on the stacks.
So main is going to call
factorial with the 3.
So here's the activation
record for factorial from this
call right here from main.
Notice a factorial function right
here has one local variable n.
So we need to allocate storage for it.
And it's say that
that's in right here.
And what's the value for n?
Well, in this case, it's 3, right.
I'm passing 3 into this function.
So n is going to get a 3.
And I'm going to write the
code right here in the stack.
The code doesn't exist on the stack.
It exists somewhere else,
but here you'll be able to
follow it easier I think.
So what do we do?
We start executing the code.
Is n equal to 0.
No, n is equal to 3.
So, what do I do?
I return -- I'm just going to write
n which is 3 x factorial of in -1.
Well, 3 - 1 is 2.
So we need to call that function.
So what do we do?
Again, we transfer control
to the other function.
What are the function is it?
It's the same one.
We're just calling to recursively.
So in this case, what am I doing?
I'm calling factorial with the 2.
Factorial has an n.
So we need to allocate
storage for an n.
It's just another activation record.
In this case, n is 2.
Let's start executing.
Is n equal to 0, No.
So I want to return n which is 2 x
factorial of n - 1, well, 2 - 1 is 1.
so I'm going to do that.
Now notice what just happened.
I've got to activation records on
the stack for the same function.
That's the definition of recursion.
All right, so now what are we doing?
We're going to call
factorial with a 1.
And you could see the
stack just growing, right.
Well, factorial is the same
function, it's got an n.
In this case, I'm
calling it with the 1.
I'm passing the by value.
So there's the 1.
And what does it do?
Is n equal to 0, nope.
So it's going to return n,
which is 1 x factorial of
and - 1 which in this case is 0.
So what do I do?
Again, I stopped and I call factorial
again in this case with the 0.
So let's do that.
Well, here, we're going to call
factorial with a 0 and gets a 0.
Now we're here.
This is the base case.
Finally, we're going
to start unwinding.
Is n equal to 0?
Yes.
So what do I do?
I return 1.
Return 1 to who.
Whoever called me.
Well, here's the call, right here.
So the value of that call will be 1.
Okay, and now what we do
is we start unwinding.
So this gets popped off the stack.
And now we're here.
Well, this guy cannot
return as well, right?
So it's going to return what.
It's going to return 1 x 1, 1
x 1 2 to this guy right here.
So 1 x 1 is 1.
And we're going to pop off the stack.
So this function now is gone.
That activation record gets
cleaned up, and we're here, right.
So hopefully, everybody's with me.
It's pretty straightforward.
It's just a matter of keeping
all your ducks in a row.
So here, we're going to return 2 x
1 which is 2 to this function call.
That's the value of
that function call.
That's the 2.
And again, we're going to clean
up the stack and gets popped off.
That activation record all
was -- all those areas in the
stack that we allocated are gone.
So now we're here.
Finally, we can calculate this
result which is 3 x 2 which is 6.
So we're going to return 6 to who,
this guy is the one that called me.
That's a 6 right there, right.
The value of that
function call is a 6.
What are we going to do now?
Pop off the stack.
We're cleaning up finally.
See that's the that's called
unwinding from a recursive call.
So we're here.
Now we've got us 6.
And what do we do with the 6?
We out put it.
And that's the final result of the
call to factorial with a 3 days.
You can see it's
pretty straightforward.
It's a matter of your recursive
calls -- pushed on the stack
and then you start unwinding.
The unwinding is starting right there.
That's the critical
piece, that bass case.
If you forget that bass case or
get it wrong, then this will just
keep going and going and eventually
you're going to run out of stack
space and get a stack overflow error.
Okay, so there you go.
Obviously, if you remember the
Fibonacci function, it's more
complicated than this, right,
because then he had to go back to
this so you can see the Fibonacci
function, which was right here has
two pieces of recursion, right.
So we're going to have to call
recursive functions calling
itself obviously, but it's
calling it twice per call.
So the amount of stack
space it's used is larger.
That's why Fibonacci takes
longer than factorial to execute,
especially with very large numbers.
Okay, so hopefully this diagram helps.
Recursion makes a lot of sense.
Once you understand what's
really going on on the stack,
I think it totally makes sense.